[tense jazzy music]
♪ ♪
- Escape...
what a word,
what a concept.
The dictionary says
escape means "to break loose,"
"to bust free."
[chuckles]
Yeah, there are all kind of
ways to get the fuck out of Oz.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
For example,
you can dig your way out.
[bell ringing]
- Hurry up.
I'll put the tiles back.
♪ ♪
[bell ringing]
[indistinct chatter]
- Okay, everybody, listen up.
As you probably know,
Officer Whittlesey
has transferred to Unit B.
Replacing her as Em City
supervisor is Karl Metzger.
Officer Metzger.
- Oh, no, this guy.
- Some of you know me
from Ad Seg.
My rep is that I'm tough,
but I'm fair.
I won't take any shit
from anybody,
but I don't intend
to give any either.
All right.
That's all.
[gate buzzes]
- Count!
[indistinct chatter]
[gate buzzes]
- It's got to be
in here somewhere.
- What's going on?
- Where is it?
- Where's what?
- Hey, don't play games
with me, asshole.
Where's the tunnel?
- What tunnel?
♪ ♪
- We've been
watching you.
- Leave him alone.
- Here it is.
♪ ♪
- Holy shit!
[both laughing]
How far along are you?
- We figure by tomorrow,
we're on the other side
of the prison wall.
- When you go,
we're going with you.
- How?
We're gonna
leave at night.
You'll be locked
into your own pod.
- Then we'll switch pods.
- What?
- You two will
switch pods with us.
Otherwise, we tell the hacks
about what's going on.
- All right.
If you can arrange the exchange,
the tunnel's yours.
- Rebadow!
- Shut up, Busmalis.
- Yeah, shut up,
Bushman.
- I can't let those Nazis
go through Lizzie.
It would be like
they were raping her.
- In my years at Oz,
I've learned one rule--
accept the hand
you're dealt.
We'll lose the
tunnel either way.
Better to let it go and start
a new one in the next pod.
- [sighs]
Oh, fuck.
- Metzger?
- Yeah?
- I need an ask.
- Hey, Tim,
I want to move Rebadow
and Busmalis out of their pod.
- Fine.
- Don't you want
to know why?
- I trust you.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- Take care of her.
- Fuck you.
- [laughing]
- Stupid fucks.
[bell ringing]
- There they go.
How can you be so calm?
- What would you
have me do?
- [grunts]
All right.
[grunting]
Oh, shit.
♪ ♪
[grunts]
Let's go, pussy.
- They should
almost be there.
- Yes.
- We should've
told them.
- No.
- Yes.
We should have
warned them
that we weakened
all the support beams.
We should have
warned them
that the tunnel will collapse
on top of them.
♪ ♪
- Oh, shit.
This fucking thing here.
I think I can get by.
♪ ♪
Careful.
[grunts]
Oh, sh--
[rumbling]
You all right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah!
- What the hell
are you doing here?
- Prisoner number 96N542,
Mark Mack.
Convicted June 1, '96,
murder in the second degree,
vandalism, hate crimes.
Sentence--70 years.
Up for parole in 40.
[bird caws]
[rumbling]
- Yo, back up!
Back up, man!
Back up!
It's falling down.
It's collapsing, man!
Shit, man,
back up.
Go, man, go!
[both screaming]
- I've been here
five minutes!
I got two bodies
on my floor!
This is not the way shit's
gonna happen with me here!
We find one more hole,
who's going in it?
I'm putting one
of you goddamn cocksuckers
in the next fucking
hole we find!
Who wants a shovel, huh?
Dig me the goddamn hole!
You gonna dig me a hole?
Go ahead!
God damn it!
- The tunnel was found in
what used to be your pod.
- Yes, he dug it.
- Rebadow.
- Under orders
from Mark Mack.
- Mack forced you to dig?
- He threatened to kill
Busmalis, didn't he?
- Yes,
the Nazi bastard.
- If that's true,
you should have come to us.
- That's easy to say.
The poor man was terrified.
- Terrified.
- Busmalis warned
them of the dangers,
but they were
so anxious to go.
- They wouldn't
listen to a word.
- Um, even so...
these two
should be punished.
- Well, neither one has much
of a discipline problem.
You can go.
[gate buzzes in the distance]
[tense percussive tones]
[indistinct chatter]
♪ ♪
[gate buzzes]
- Poet, what's up?
- It's my new
work assignment,
here in the morgue.
McManus' revenge on me
for screwing up outside, man.
- Yeah, what
happened, man?
You was free.
- Yeah,
and still a fiend.
I spent all the money I got
for that book on crack,
and when the cash ran out,
them fucking dealers
came after me, man.
I was defending myself.
- [scoffs]
You shot a guy six times.
- I had to make sure
the nigga was dead.
- Yeah.
- So what do
we do here?
- You know,
wait for the mortician
to get back from lunch.
Undertaker school in town
sends a student up to work
on our corpses
for the practice.
- We help them out?
- Yeah, you know,
hand them shit--
embalming fluid,
cosmetics...
- Cosmetics?
You mean like--
you mean like lipstick and shit?
- Sure. You got to look pretty
before they plant you.
- Shit, I ain't no girl.
They ain't putting none
of that shit on my face, yo.
- When you're dead you
don't have much of a choice.
Death is a lot
like life in Oz, man.
It'll work.
I'm telling you, it'll work.
- What are you talking about?
What'll work?
- Yo, check this out.
Money got a plan
to escape out of Oz, yo.
- What's up?
What's up?
- Yo, we working
stiff patrol, right?
- Right.
- So just now we loaded
those two Aryan fucks
into boxes, right,
which get sent to
a funeral home for burial.
So my idea is,
next time somebody dies,
I get in the box instead.
- Hill...
coffins are air-tight.
You'd die of asphyxiation.
- Thank you.
- Not if I drill some subtle
little holes
in the right places.
- Yeah, but the casket
would be sealed.
You'd be trapped inside.
- Not if I get a couple
of friends of mine
to come to the funeral home
and break me out.
- Yeah, but what you gonna do
with the real motherfuckers
that die?
- Mm-hmm.
- How hard is it to hide a
couple of bodies up in Oz, son?
Temporarily at least?
- It's a good plan.
- Good plan.
Shit might work.
- That's what
I'm saying.
- That's better than having
a motherfucker mail you out.
- No, man, I was bullshitting.
- I wouldn't be telling
everybody.
- But I was bullshitting.
You thought I wanted--
Express mail.
- Yeah, all right.
- Every inmate
wants out of prison,
by hook or by crook.
Of course, there are some
who find that once they're free,
life on the other side ain't
all it's cracked up to be.
[thunder booming]
- I'm here to see
Sister Peter Marie.
[indistinct chatter]
- Robert Sippel's
out front asking for you.
So, Father, meet any cute boys
on the outside?
Any boys
with the first name Dick?
[chuckles]
- You look exhausted.
- Well, the last few days
have been very difficult.
Registering
as a convicted pervert
was more difficult
than I thought.
I had to go down
to the courthouse
and stand in line
with ordinary people...
Wanting fishing licenses
and learner's permits.
I stepped up
to the counter
and softly explained
to the clerk why I was there.
She boomed,
"Perverts
fill out these."
- Oh, boy.
So, uh...
how's the
job search going?
- [scoffs] Seek and ye
shall find, right?
It's hard enough getting
employment as an ex-con,
but once they discover that
I've fondled a young boy...
- Well, have you found
a place to live?
- After ten years
of imprisonment,
my first two nights
of freedom
were spent sleeping
on the subway.
- [sighs]
Well, you know I'll do
anything I can to help.
- Well, that's
why I'm here.
Would you please speak
with Warden Glynn?
- About what?
- Letting me sleep
here in Oz.
- You want me to let
Robert Sippel move into a cell?
- Just until he finds a
landlord who'll rent him a room.
- [sighs] I need to see
the shift log.
He'll have to
stay in Gen Pop.
He'll be at risk.
- Yeah, he's
aware of that.
- You know, he's not
gonna get an apartment
unless he has a job.
- Well, that's my
next mission.
I got to find somebody who
will hire a defrocked priest.
- I will.
- You?
- Yeah, as my assistant.
I've got a discretionary fund
from the diocese.
I guess it's time
I used my discretion.
Well, there's not
much room here, but...
- I appreciate
this, Father.
- Oh, yeah, well,
I needed a--
As you can see,
I'm not very organized.
- You're still
uncomfortable around me.
[phone ringing]
Chaplin's office.
Yes.
Okay, okay,
I'll tell him.
A patient in the
hospital is dying.
He's asked
for the anointing.
If I'm really here
to help you, Father,
let me help you.
- He pardons
all your inequities.
He heals all your ills.
He redeems your
life from destruction.
He crowns you with His
kindness and compassion.
Father in Heaven,
through this holy anointing,
grant Joseph comfort
in his suffering.
Through Christ
our lord, amen.
[gate buzzes]
Mr. Hannssel.
Hi, I'm Father Mukada.
- Thanks for
seeing me.
- Sure.
- This past few weeks,
there's been plenty of stuff
in the press,
what, with the legislature
passing that law requiring
sex offenders to register
and Father Sippel getting out.
It stirred up
a lot of things in me--
feelings I thought
I'd put down.
- I told him that
you were coming.
- Is he willing to
talk with me?
- Yes.
He feels that he owes
you that much, at least.
- I've never been
in prison before.
- Don't worry.
There'll be a correctional
officer with you the whole time.
- Yeah,
to protect me...
or him?
[chuckles]
I'm sorry, Father.
Look, I have no intention
of harming the man.
I don't really know what
my intentions are except, uh...
I haven't seen
him since that day.
Ten years is a long time
to carry the shit inside.
Sorry to say "shit"
in front of a priest.
- Sometimes "shit" is
the only word that fits.
♪ ♪
- Yes?
- How do you live
with yourself?
- How do you?
- [scoffs]
Whatever I've done,
I've done for righteous reasons.
Any laws I've broken
don't deserve to be laws.
But you,
you, you...
fucking baby raper,
you should be dead.
- Back in your cage,
Schillinger.
Don't make
me use this.
You wouldn't want me to
enjoy myself, now, would you?
[laughter, indistinct chatter]
- Way to go, Vern!
[laughter]
- Thank you, Officer.
- I'm just doing
my job, pal.
For once, I agree
with that Nazi fuck.
[indistinct chatter]
- What do you need?
- Some rec time.
- With who?
- Sippel.
- [shouts]
No, no, no!
[screaming]
- Keep moving.
- No!
[screaming]
[hammer clanging]
[continues screaming]
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- Don't be nervous.
- I'm not nervous.
- Well, you seem nervous,
which I can understand,
you and me being locked
in this cell together.
- Breathe.
- You don't touch
many women, do you?
- Nope.
- I can tell.
You're twisting and turning
my body like I'm a man.
- I'm treating you like
a patient, any patient.
- Oh, that's right.
Doctors can't feel emotion
toward their case load.
- That's not true,
we're compassionate.
Look up.
- Oh, yeah.
Compassion--
that marvelous thing which
allows you to be human
and still be
above the rest of us.
- You're fine.
We're done.
- Am I well
enough to die?
- Healthy enough
to execute?
- Look,
if I'm nervous, it's because
I don't understand how a woman,
a mother could do
that to her own child,
her own
flesh and blood.
- It was an accident.
- Officer.
The next time
I see you, Shirley,
I'll be standing
over a gurney about
to poke you with
a lethal injection.
♪ ♪
[indistinct chatter
in the distance]
- Thank you,
darling.
[chuckles]
♪ ♪
[sighs]
[laughter in the distance,
chatter continues]
♪ ♪
- What's the
opposite of escape?
I don't mean arriving.
I mean being in a place
and getting sucked deeper
and deeper inside,
so far down that you almost
burst through to another side.
- I'll get you some more
quaaludes from the hospital.
- Hey, Hernandez, get
your feet off the table.
You hear me, or do I got to have
to translate?
- What's the problem?
- Hernandez here--
he's got an attitude.
- Raoul, I'm gonna
ask you nicely,
once.
Will you please take
your feet off the table?
Will you do
that for me, huh?
♪ ♪
Thank you.
Let's go, Eugene.
♪ ♪
Let's go, let's go.
- Alvarez,
Rivera's still
got his eyes.
- You gonna do your job, man,
or you a fag?
- I'm just waiting
for the right moment.
- [chuckles,
imitates chicken clucking]
- You shut the fuck up.
- Huh?
- I'll take
your fucking eyes.
- Come and try.
- Yo, drop it now,
all right?
Today, white boy.
Do it today, Michael.
[gate buzzes]
- I got tickets
to the Knights game.
- Who they playing?
- Chicago.
You want to go?
- I can't,
I got a date.
- Ray?
- I got to see Sippel
at Benchley Memorial.
- At least now he's got a
place to sleep, right?
- Tim.
Leo, do you have any idea
who crucified Sippel?
- No, not yet.
- I bet a C.O.
was involved.
[man screaming]
- Oh, my God.
My eyes! My eyes!
[continues screaming]
- [screams]
- I need a C.O. in here!
- Get some help!
[continues screaming]
[buzzer sounding]
[suspenseful music]
- Lockdown!
Lockdown!
- [screaming]
- [shouting indistinctly]
[dark music]
♪ ♪
- He's not
in Emerald City.
- Search the whole prison.
Search every fucking inch!
[buzzer continues]
- Lockdown!
Lockdown!
[indistinct chatter]
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
- How's he doing?
- He's sedated,
but, Leo, his eyes are gone.
He's also lost
a lot of blood.
He's going to
need a transfusion.
- Then do it.
- He's AB negative.
I called the blood bank--
they're out.
- Then find somebody at Oz
with that blood type.
- We're cross-checking staff
medical records right now.
It's gonna
take some time.
- Christ!
[dark music]
♪ ♪
- [sighs]
- Shut up!
Shut the fuck up!
- No!
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
All right.
- Shh!
- SORT Team's going through
every unit cell by cell.
So far,
no sign of Alvarez.
- Shit.
- Oh, God.
- What?
- No one on the staff
was AB negative,
so I started checking
the inmates' records.
I found a prisoner
with the same blood type.
- So let's get him down here.
- Who is it?
- [sighs]
Ryan O'Reily.
[tense percussive tones]
- Fuck you.
- A man's life is in danger.
- A hack's life.
Fuck you!
- God damn it, O'Reily!
I'm sick
of your fucking bullshit!
Now, you need
to do this now!
- There's only one
of two ways
you're gonna get
my blood out of me.
You either tie me down,
and you take it...
- Or?
- Or you let my brother Cyril
out of the Hole
and you put him
in Em City with me.
- Miguel, you got to
think this through.
- I'm trying,
I'm trying.
- There's no way out.
Eventually the SORT Team
is gonna find us here,
and then what are you
going to do?
How are you gonna
fight them off?
They got rifles.
You got shot during the riot,
you want to get shot again?
- They'll fucking catch me,
you know.
They're gonna fucking
beat the shit out of me.
- Miguel, I promise you
I won't let them.
- That's fucking
bullshit, man!
What the fuck
you gonna do?
You gonna fucking
hold up a crucifix?
[monitor beeping]
[indistinct chatter]
[tense music]
- Lie down.
♪ ♪
- I remember stories
about my--my grandfather,
how, um, he killed a guy
who cut out my father's tongue,
ended up
in Solitary, right?
You know
what he was like?
- Yeah.
- He spent 20 years--
20 years in Solitary.
Then he goes fucking crazy
because
of the Alzheimer's, right?
I mean, the thought of that,
man, the thought of that,
of spending the rest
of my fucking life
in a little fucking room!
No fucking one around
except a few fucking hacks.
Fuck.
I tell you, man,
I couldn't handle that.
No, no way.
I mean, I got a problem
as it is being in small places.
But to be in
a little fucking room,
I'll fucking
go bugs in a day.
No, no, no, no, no.
They put me
in Solitary,
they might as well
beat me to death.
- Miguel...
we've been through
a lot together, you and me.
And you got to believe me
when I tell you,
there's no alternative.
- Yeah, there is.
You see that?
When I did that,
I was fucking nuts.
You see,
I know that now.
You know what I should've
done instead?
I should've cut
my fucking throat.
- Miguel, no.
You don't know what you're
talking about, all right?
Just look at me.
- Say a prayer for me, Father.
- Miguel, please, don't.
Miguel, Miguel, no!
[suspenseful music]
Don't hurt him!
- No!
- Don't hurt him!
- I'm promised him
you wouldn't!
- No!
No!
♪ ♪
Get the fuck off me!
No, please!
Don't lock me in here!
Please!
Don't!
No!
Aah!
Let me out!
[screaming]
Ah! Fuck!
Let me out!
[bell ringing]
- End of lockdown.
- They must've found
Alvarez.
- Yeah.
- They'll charge him,
attempted murder,
let his ass die
in Solitary.
- Yeah.
- I feel bad, man,
you know?
I was wrong about him,
He did have balls.
[tense percussive tones]
[monitor beeping]
- Hey, Gloria,
I have to talk to you.
- What?
What could you possibly
have to say to me?
"I'm sorry"?
- How's Rivera?
- We'll know more
in a few hours.
- All right.
Cyril's been moved
to Em City.
- McManus.
I fucked up a lot
of people's lives.
- Yeah.
- My brother Cyril
got slow because of me.
We were
at this funeral,
and there was this chick there
that I used to date.
She was there with her
new boyfriend, some wise guy.
But she and me,
we're still hot for each other.
[bell tolling]
[women crying]
- You fuck!
Get off her,
you fuck!
- Get the fuck
out of here.
Cyril!
Cyril got brain damaged
defending me.
When the doctors
told me
that Cyril would never
be the same again,
that he would have
the mind of a five-year-old,
fuck,
it crushed me.
So I got wasted.
I lost control.
Yeah!
[siren wailing]
Everything I've done
since I've gotten here
was to protect my  ass
so that I could make parole.
But...
what I feel for Gloria...
It blinded me.
So I lost
control again.
And now
Cyril's in Oz,
and he's gonna be here
for the next 60 years,
and he got raped
by Schillinger,
and he's afraid.
So...
I got to stay here
with Cyril.
I got to
protect my brother.
I mean, for once
in my fucking life,
I'm gonna be
his big brother.
- You had Cyril
kill Gloria's husband.
- Yes.
- You'll be brought up
on charges.
- That's what
I deserve.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
[indistinct chatter]
Hey, fuck off.
- Hey, Ryan.
- Hey, hey.
- Hey.
Hey.
- How are you?
- Hmm...
This morning I cleaned out
Preston's closet...
- [sighs]
- Boxed up his things
from his chest of drawers.
The man had seven
mismatched cuff links.
Who saves
one cuff link?
You lose one,
you throw the other one away.
Who even wears
cuff links these days?
- Preston had style.
- Yeah.
- You hungry?
- You want to have
dinner or something?
- Oh, no, thanks.
- Not like a date
or anything.
- No.
- [grunts]
Hey, um, I got to
ask you something
about O'Reily.
Do you think
he really loves you?
- Yeah.
No one will ever love me
as much as Ryan O'Reily...
and I have to live
with that fact
every day
for the rest of my life.
[siren wailing in the distance]
- You can escape from Oz
in subtle ways--
heroin, alcohol.
You shellac your brain
with chemicals,
and it's almost
as good as being free.
Problem is,
you do too many drugs,
and you become a prisoner
of a different sort.
And it's even harder to escape
the emptiness that follows.
[tires screech, crash]
- [echoing]
I love you.
- I love you, Toby.
[man screaming]
[gate buzzes]
- Ah.
[chuckles]
Chris, at last.
Give me a kiss.
- You're drunk.
- You bet
your ass I am.
Oh...
did you miss me?
Christ,
I missed you.
Come on,
let's fuck.
- I don't want
to fuck you, Beecher.
I don't even want to be
in the same room with you.
- Where you going?
Chris.
- Hey, don't fucking
touch me.
- Chris.
- Go away.
- Are you mad at me
about something?
- Look, forget it.
- No, tell me.
- I said "forget it."
- No, if I did
something, I'm sorry.
- Keep your
voice down, huh?
Look...
I had a lot of time to think
about things in the Hole,
and one of the things
I've decided on
is you and me are through.
- Jesus,
what did I do?
- Look, we'll talk about this
when you're sober.
- Chris,
what did I do?
- Leave me alone.
- If it's the drinking,
I can stop.
I can
stop the drinking.
I can.
- Don't fucking
touch me.
[laughter]
[indistinct chatter]
- Chris.
[laughter, chatter continue]
- Pussy!
[tense percussive tones]
[bell ringing]
- Ah!
[chuckles]
♪ ♪
[bell ringing]
- So?
- I've been
out of the Hole two days,
I haven't spoken more than
ten words to Beecher.
- Yeah, I seen him.
He's a fucking mess.
He is on the ledge.
- I say it's about time
we pushed him off.
- You look like
warmed-over shit, Beecher.
- It's been
a rough couple days.
- Workout
will do you good.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- Hey, Beech.
- [laughs wickedly]
- No! You--
- All right, all right.
- You fucking--
- Behave!
- You and him?
- Say what?
Oh, yeah, we've known each other
a long time.
I've known Vern since we were
both doing time up in Lardner.
I was 17 and, uh...
Well, he saved my life
from some big, dumb nigger
who wanted me
to be his prag.
No, I don't think so.
- [breathing heavily]
- I've owed him
ever since.
I don't love you.
I've never loved you,
not for a second.
- [laughs]
- Let him go.
- Chris--
- No, let him go!
Let's see
what you got there, Toby.
This time for real.
[laughing]
[suspenseful music]
- [shouts indistinctly]
♪ ♪
[bone cracking]
Aah!
[laughter]
- My turn now.
Sieg hiel,  baby.
Sieg  fucking  hiel!
- Aah!
- They broke both
his arms and his legs?
- Hey, what's he do
when he gets an itch?
- He looked like
a fucking pretzel.
- That's because he was
in love with Keller.
- Love hurts.
- Schillinger did this.
- Fucking Schillinger
did this, man.
- Yo, son,
I want to move in here.
- Why?
- It's a better view.
- How'd this happen?
Who took Beecher
to the gym?
- I don't know,
but I'll find out.
[tense music]
♪ ♪
[monitor beeping]
- Hey, Leo, what do you know
about Karl Metzger?
- I only know
what's in the file, why?
- I don't know.
I just got a bad feeling
about this guy.
[gate buzzes]
♪ ♪
- Yeah, there are all kind
of ways to escape from Oz.
You can dig a tunnel,
you can die,
or you can exit
through your soul.
Oh.
- Yo...
Nappa got ahold
of our tits.
That bitch
stole them from us!
- He got my tits?
- Yeah, look,
I don't know how,
but he got the package
before we did,
and I don't know how the fuck
he found out,
but we're fucked.
- Okay.
- We gots to
burn that wop, Adebisi.
- We will.
- When, man?
Damn!
All you been doing
is laying in the bed
these past
couple of days.
And we've been covering
for you in the kitchen,
and frankly, we getting
tired of this shit!
- Are you giving
me orders, Kenny?
- I know why
you have come.
- You are
a fetisher.
You can see the future
in those shells.
- They've already
told me we will meet.
- Well, if you're so smart,
what are you
doing in prison?
[mystical music]
♪ ♪
- [shouting
in native language]
- Prisoner number 98J604,
Kipekemie Jara,
convicted August 1,'98--
criminally
negligent homicide.
Sentence--20 years.
Up for a parole in 8.
- I believe I was
sent here for you.
If you don't
change your ways,
stop the drugs,
the violence,
you will die.
- Everyone will die.
That's everybody's future.
- How long have you
been in America?
- 15 years.
- You see?
You have lost
the sense of...
[speaks native language]
- [scoffs]
Home?
- Yes, home,
where you come from.
You've been here
for too long.
You don't
know who you are.
You disgrace
our people.
- "Our people"?
Our people who have let
oyinbo  come in and use us?
Our people who don't
protect what we have got?
- Even so,
when we die,
our souls return
to the place of birth.
You have
abandoned yours.
You must embrace it
if you want peace.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
[bell ringing]
- [groans]
- Well, Simon, your urine test
came in negative.
- You see?
I'm drug-free.
- Yeah, that's great.
So how you feeling
physically, detox?
- [chuckles] I have
the heart of a lion, Sister.
Whoo!
- Well, I'll be.
You actually look happy.
- You were right.
Oh, snorting
all that shit,
I was avoiding
something--
myself.
But, you know,
since the first time
I came to Oz,
I found...
[speaks native language]
Family.
- Nappa's saying
he's the man in charge now.
He's got the tits, and
he's got Adebisi by the balls.
- Let him talk all the shit
he wants, okay?
Fuck Nappa.
- Yeah, well, I don't know
how you can trust Adebisi now.
I mean, just fucking
look at the guy.
- I remember
the peace.
I remember.
- You see
what I'm saying?
- Come on.
- That was bad,
what you said.
- Yeah, well, in Oz,
bad is good.
Adebisi and his crew--[chuckles]
they're starting to crack.
I'd give it a couple of days
before approaching them.
- Good.
I need you to find out
something else for me.
- Yeah?
What's that?
- Adebisi
isn't just detoxing.
Something or someone
is screwing with his head.
- You mean
that guy Jara?
Man, they got some
strange shit going on.
Voilà.
- O'Reily, you a user?
- Not anymore.
Tits are purely
for profit.
- Pleasure
doing business you.
That old man Jara?
- Yeah.
I want him dead.
- Yo, yo.
[sniffs]
Anybody
smell garlic?
- Hey, fuck you.
- Easy, everybody,
we didn't come here to fight.
Your man Adebisi,
he's lost his edge.
- Nah, he's just a little sick,
that's all.
He'll be all right.
- Really?
I got control
of all the tits in Oz,
you guys got shit.
Now, rather than us
taking shots at each other,
I say we call a truce
and work together.
- We have
our own operation.
We don't need you.
- Think about that
for a moment.
Who's gonna get
every pair of tits
that comes
in this place, huh?
Make the smart
decision here.
- We ain't gonna
be your bitches.
- Hey, we work together,
we share.
We in business?
Now, as a sign
of good faith,
there's a little job
I need done.
- Adebisi,
why you letting
that old motherfucker
work in the kitchen
with us, huh?
He's slowing us down.
- Shut up, Kenny.
I need more corn.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- Die, old man.
- [grunting]
[breathing heavily]
[boxes clatter]
- Jara.
Jara.
What happened?
- I can't breathe.
- Don't talk,
I'll get some help.
Get me
some help!
Help me.
Don't talk.
- I'm going home.
- No, don't leave me.
See you.
[groans]
- Jara?
Don't leave me, man.
[percussive tribal music]
♪ ♪
Can you hear the drums?
Can you hear them?
♪ ♪
[shouts]
[music continues]
♪ ♪
[music stops]
- Okay, Adebisi,
settle down.
It's okay,
Johnson, grab him.
Okay, Adebisi,
we're just gonna
bring you somewhere
where they can
talk to you.
- Back to your cells.
Come on.
You were there. How can you not
know what happened?
- I don't know
what happened.
Adebisi's been
going through detox
and acting
all crazy lately,
and then he goes
and stabs that sweet old man.
I don't know.
I just don't know.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
[man screams]
[man screaming]
[door closes]
[percussive tribal music]
- [yelling]
♪ ♪
- There are legal ways
to escape from Oz--
parole hearings,
court appeals,
and then there's clemency.
Clemency.
It sounds so benign,
doesn't it?
So purifying.
[urine splashing]
- Ahh.
- The phone's
ready for you.
- Thank you,
my brother.
[indistinct chatter]
[tapping number pad]
Yes, this is
Kareem Said.
I have an interview
scheduled for 10:30.
Yes.
[chuckles]
Alaikum salaam,
my brother.
Oh, yes, I am he.
Let me first say,
I'm really sorry. I didn't know
much about your radio show.
Inside Oswald we are
restricted in what we see,
hear, and are exposed to.
That is another reason
why, uh, I wrote my new book.
- I say we institute
a no-swearing rule.
- Man, fuck you.
- Suck my dick.
- Asswipe.
- Cocksucker.
- You stupid cunt.
- Putz.
- If nobody has anything
more intelligent to say,
this meeting is adjourned.
Said?
Yes?
I'll take him back
to Em City.
It's about Poet.
I've tried talking
to him several times,
but he's completely
closed himself off to me.
Have you
talked to him?
- [scoffs]
What's the point?
- Well, to try to reach him,
to start over.
- I've done everything
I could to help that boy.
So have you.
I'm done with him.
- Hey, wait a second.
What's this?
Where's your
"every soul is redeemable,
never give up"
attitude?
- Yeah, where is it,
McManus?
You know,
when I was arrested,
I thought to myself, "Hey...
this is the will of Allah."
I can go to Oz,
and I can help my brothers.
- And you haven't.
I feel the same way
sometimes.
Oh, I know you do,
McManus.
I see you.
The difference is you can
go home every night.
You're free to quit,
get yourself another job.
I'm gonna be here
for another 17 years.
I've been thinking
a lot lately
about what else I could've done
with that time.
- You mean like
have a family?
- Oh, yes.
- You still can
when you get out.
You're not too old.
- After two decades
in maximum security,
what the hell would I have
to offer a wife?
What could I
offer a child?
- Your faith.
I thought your faith
sustained you.
- It does...
Most of the time.
[door rumbles open]
- Attention--
the following prisoners
are to report
to the warden's office,
97F444, Kareem Said,
97A622, Zahir Arif,
89B267, Nasim Bismilla,
85A245, Sanjay Afsana.
- Said.
Have a seat.
- Said,
every year the governor
grants clemency
for a number
of prisoners.
- Just around
Christmastime.
- This year he's decided to do
two special releases--
one for Passover,
one for Ramadan.
- I know
all about this.
I've been working
with other Islamic leaders
trying to get
the government to initiate it.
- Right.
Devlin's asked us
to go over the case files
of our Muslim prisoners
and recommend a candidate.
- But he specifically
wanted us to consider you.
- It's a trick, right?
There has to be
strings attached.
Exactly what do I have to
give up to gain my freedom?
- Nothing.
- The big question is,
if the governor
offers clemency,
will you take it?
- Yes.
[bell ringing]
I tell you this--
we must be happy for
whichever one of us is chosen.
- Yeah, especially
if it's you.
- Arif?
- I'm sorry.
It's just that
I have children.
I know they're being careful,
but it's not the same thing.
They miss me.
I miss them.
- I know.
- Do you?
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- [sighs]
- It's all about Said.
- That's the will of Allah.
- Come on, now.
- Stop it! Stop it!
- Hey, hey,
what's going on?
Step away.
- Madness.
- Come here.
Come here.
[gate buzzes]
You're the one,
the one
Devlin's chosen.
- [chuckles]
- Ramadan
starts Thursday.
He's doing
a press conference.
I...
I feel like I should
congratulate you, but...
- But what?
Don't tell me you're gonna
miss me when I'm gone.
- No, not at all.
It's just...
none of this
sits right with me.
As-salaam alaikum.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪
- And the celebration
of Ramadan
is at the center
of Islamic worship,
therefore, I'm pleased,
in the grand tradition
of this holy time,
to bestow clemency
on a prisoner.
Kareem Said has been
an outspoken critic
of our administration,
but political
differences aside,
he has been
an outstanding member
of the prison
population.
Even after suffering
a heart attack last year,
he's continued to work
with prisoners
of every race and color,
especially the young,
to instruct them and
to guide them to better lives.
So, I hereby grant
Kareem Said
a full pardon,
and I wish him well
in his new life.
[applause]
[reporters shouting]
- Finally we meet
face-to-face.
- Mr. Said,
how do you feel?
- How do I feel?
[scoffs]
I feel joyless.
My brothers
remain behind,
imprisoned, suppressed.
I don't just mean
my Muslim brothers.
I mean every single man that
will sleep in here tonight,
that was cut off
from everything that he loves,
cut off
from his own self.
You know,
as the word went around
that the governor was gonna
give somebody clemency...
I saw a riff develop
as each inmate wished himself
to be the chosen one.
The longing to be free
became as palpable
as the food that we eat.
[scoffs]
But it is a meal that I am
being served right now...
And I am Muslim,
and Allah does not allow me
to swallow certain things.
Allah does not allow me
to take scraps
from the hands of a man
such as this...
a man who is
corrupt and immoral,
a man who denigrates
the gift of clemency
just as he violates
the principles of justice,
a man that
gave the order
that caused the death
of eight people.
And so, Governor Devlin,
because even the cost
of freedom can be too high,
I refuse your pardon.
[all yelling]
Officer,
take him back inside.
[reporters shouting]
- Cocksucker.
[all clamoring]
[shouting continues]
[clamoring continues]
- Stupid!
[shouting continues]
- How do you respond
to this, Governor?
[gate buzzes]
[prisoners cheering]
[prisoners chanting]
Said, Said, Said, Said,
Said, Said, Said,
Said, Said, Said, Said!
- Yeah...
everybody wants
to escape from Oz.
Of course, the truth is,
there is no escape.
I mean, let's say
you manage to sneak out,
then you got to run
and keep running.
A life of running away
ain't no life at all.
Better to stay put,
face reality,
deal with what you've got,
and make the best of it.
Yeah.
The measure of a man
is not where he lives,
but how,
how he makes the best of it.
Make the best of it.
Later.
[tense percussive tones]
♪ ♪